In XML schema,
it's possible to define a default value for elements and attributes.
Like in the previous clip,
let's take a look at how to specify this on the JAXB annotations and
what it means for marshalling and unmarshalling.
The example for this clip is ps-jaxb-16-defaultvalue.
Please open it in your IDE.
Let's look at class Customer for this example.
Suppose that we would want to set a default value for the
Loyalty field so that if it's not set,
the lowest loyalty setting will be selected,
which is BRONZE.
We can specify that using the default value
attribute of the XmlElement annotation.
In XML schema,
it's possible to define default values for attributes in
exactly the same way as for elements,
by adding a default attribute to the access attribute declaration.
But for some reason, this is missing from the JAXB XmlAttribute annotation.
It does not have a default value attribute just like the XmlElement annotation.
This seems to be a missing feature in JAXB.
There are ways to have a default value for attributes,
but let's first look at what the default value attribute on the
XmlElement annotation means for marshalling and unmarshalling.
Just like with the required attribute that we saw in the previous clip,
it works in a slightly different way than what you might expect intuitively.
First, let's take a look at marshalling.
Let's go to the createPurchaseOrder method in class MarshalExample and comment
out the line where we set the loyalty value of the customer.
What do you think we would see in the XML when we run this example?
It's not strange if you would think that.
Since we didn't set the loyalty, JAXB would take the default value,
and we would see BRONZE in the XML.
But that's not what happens.
If you run this,
you'll see that the loyalty element is completely missing from the XML.
For marshalling, the default value attribute is ignored,
just like the required attribute, as we saw in the previous clip.
It's counterintuitive, but the reason for why it works like this is as follows.
First, according to JAXB, when a field is null during marshalling,
it means that the corresponding element will be omitted from the XML entirely.
That's how JAXB interprets null values.
Null means no value, which also means no XML element.
Second, according to the XML Schema standard,
when an element is missing from the XML,
then the default value that's specified in the XSD does not apply.
The default value only applies,
according to the XML schema standard if the element
is present but empty in the XML.
So the behavior that you see is a combination of these two things.
Null means no value, which means no XML element,
and no XML element means that the default value does not apply,
so there will be no element with the default value in the XML.
With this in mind,
you should also be able to understand what happens with
the default value during unmarshalling.
Class UnmarshalExample unmarshals the XML in the file purchaseOrder.
xml.
Let's first see what happens when, in that XML,
we leave out the loyalty element from the customer element.
When you run the example,
you'll see that the loyalty value is null and not the default value BRONZE.
If you think about what I said about the rule from the XML Schema specification,
this makes sense.
According to XML Schema, when the element is missing in XML,
it means that the default value does not apply,
and that's exactly what we see here.
Now let's put an empty loyalty element in the XML and
run the unmarshalling example again.
This time, you see that the default value has been applied,
so BRONZE gets printed.
To summarize the behavior,
the default value on the XmlElement annotation has no effect for marshalling,
and for unmarshalling it is only applied if the element is present in XML,
but has no value.
It is not applied if the element is missing in XML.
Finally,
I want to give you a tip for default values that works in a less
surprising way and that works for attributes,
as well as for elements.
Instead of, or in addition to,
specifying a value using the default value
attribute of the XmlElement annotation,
you can just initialize the field with the desired default value.
For example,
I can set loyalty to BRONZE so that the field will have that
value instead of null when I don't set it explicitly in the
createPurchaseOrder method.
This will also work for unmarshalling.
When JAXB creates a new customer object during unmarshalling,
the field is of course initialized to BRONZE even if there is no loyalty element in the XML at all.